---
title: Formating string using f-strings method
---

## What is f-string method and how to use it?

Before writing any academic explanation of the f-string method, we have to explore the purpose of this method and why do we need to use it. Assume you are writing a script to log your progress on a system. You want the screen to show a message like:

```
Scanning port 80

```

This text is a combination of a piece of text (as a string) that is "Scanning Port " and an integer variable which represents the number of the port being scanned. This number is an integer variable which cannot be hardcoded and is not a constant; it would be, in some cases, 80, 334, 21, etc.

So, how can we combine a piece of text or a string with a variable?

The f-string method is used to solve this problem. I can easily combine a string with a variable in one option. To do this, you need to combine a piece of text (a string) with your variable.

## The general syntax of f-strings:

In modern Python, the easiest way to put a variable inside a sentence is using an **f-string**.
 You put an **f** before the first quote and put your variable name inside curly brackets **{}**.


```python
variable1 = value1
print(f"Any piece of text with {variable1}")

```

The curly brackets **{}** inside the string make the content inside them act as a variable, not a string.
It will be replaced with the value of the variable inside the curly bracket.

**For example:**

If we have a variable called `target_port` and it has a value of 80:

```python
target_port = 80

```

And we want to print or display the value of the variable in a text, we should write:

```python
print(f"Scanning Port {target_port}")

```

This will print:

```
Scanning Port 80

```

As we see, the text contains the value of the variable, which is 80, not the name of the variable, which is "target_port".

**Example-1:**

```python
target = "Server-A"
print(f"Attacking {target}")

```

This will display:

```
Attacking Server-A

```

---

Would you like me to create a small challenge for you to practice using f-strings with multiple variables?


## Different use cases of f-strings method:


### Case 1: Combining string with a single variable:

### Case 2: Combining Multiple Variables


### Case 3: Doing Math inside the Brackets


### Case 4: Calling Functions or Methods
