---
title: Introduction to os module
---

## What is os module?
os module is a python module which contains a lot of functions and attributes that help python scripts to interact directly with Operating system.os module acts as a bridge between the OS and the python scripts because the python scripts can't interact directly with the Operating systems.


Operating systems can manipulate the file system and the memory and the CPU while the python script is a blind code that can live only in it's own memory.What is outside the memory the python script can not interact with so it comes the role or the importance of the os module.


Think of the computer as a big house full of rooms and details. The Python script is like a guest staying in this house. The operating system is the house manager who controls everything.The guest can't go around the house alone or touch things directly. He needs the house manager to guide him and carry out his requests. The Python script works the same way—it needs the house manager (OS) to access the house (hardware and resources).


The os module is like the special protocol or rules the guest uses to talk to the house manager. It's an interface or API. So the process goes: Python script (guest) → os module (protocol) → operating system (house manager) → hardware (house).No matter what kind of house it is, the os module gives the Python script a consistent way to ask the house manager for help across different operating systems.

It allows your program to perform tasks that you would normally do manually, such as creating folders, renaming files, or checking which operating system you are using



## Why Python needs the os module?
We need the os module for three reasons.

### 1- Abstraction:

The os module hides the complexity of the operating system operations. Think of it like when you are in a restaurant and want to ask for a meal. You don't need to know how the oven works or how to cut the meat; you just tell the waiter (the os module) what you want.

For example:

Imagine you want to write a Python tool that works on both Windows and Linux and must:

- Create a directory for logs.
- Write files into that directory.
- Read an environment variable (like an API key).

Without the os module, you have to write very complex code related to the operating system to create a directory for logs, write files into that directory, and then read an environment variable (like an API key). All these operations you can do easily using a terminal or file explorer, but performing all of these operations in a Python script without the os module is a very, very complex process.

If Python didn't have the os module, you would have to learn the deep, "scary" internal code of Windows AND Linux AND Mac just to save a simple text file. The os module acts as a unified interface. You give one simple command to Python, and the os module translates it into the "secret language" of whatever computer you are using.

### 2- Portability:

The os module makes Python code portable, which means this code can run normally on different operating systems because the os module is a translator between your Python code and the operating system. You write a single line of code that can be executed on different operating systems; you don't need to write code especially for each operating system. So the code will be agnostic code or cross-platform code. Think of it like this: you can go to a restaurant in London or a restaurant in Tokyo. The "menu" (the Python commands) stays the same, even if the "kitchen" (the OS) works differently in each city.

By using the os module, you are writing code that is "future-proof." If a new operating system is invented tomorrow, and Python supports it, your script will likely work there without you changing a single line of your own logic.

## Importing the os module:
To import this module inside the python file you write this:

```
import os
```

You write import os at the top of your Python file. Now you can use all os tools.When you write import os, Python does NOT copy all content into your file. That's too big and slow!

Python looks in special folders (like lib or site-packages) and loads the os module into memory. Now you can use os.function().
























