---
title: File Management
---

## What is a file and what are the differences between a file and a folder?


## Removing files using os module:
### Removing files in the current directory:
#### Removing an existing and non-locked file in the current directory :

If you try to use os.remove() on a folder, Python usually throws an OSError or a PermissionError. Basically, it's Python saying, "Wait! This is a room (folder), not a piece of paper (file). I don't have the right tool for this!"

**For example:**

#### Removing a non-existing file:
If you try to use os.remove("fileName") for a file that does not exist, Python will immediately stop your program and show a specific error.On most computers, you will see an error called FileNotFoundError. It looks something like this: FileNotFoundError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory: 'fileName'.Python does this because it wants to be sure you aren't making a mistake. It is saying: "You asked me to delete something, but I can't find it!".

As we saw with creating folders, the best way to handle this is to check before you delete.You can use os.path.exists() to make sure the file is there before you try to remove it.

**For example:**

```Python
import os

filename = "test.txt"

# 1. Check if it's actually there
if os.path.exists(filename):
    # 2. It exists, so it's safe to delete
    os.remove(filename)
    print("File deleted successfully!")
else:
    # 3. It's not there, so we just print a message instead of crashing
    print("The file was already gone, no action taken.")
```

#### Removing a locked file :
The locked file is the file that is currently open or currently in use or open in another program such as (Word, Excel). In this case, your Python script doesn't have any permission to delete that file because it is currently preserved by another program. This is normal and happens in Windows or any operating system—imagine you want to delete a file that you currently have open; the operating system will show you a message telling you to close this file before removing it.

When your Python script tries to delete this locked file, it gets stopped with a PermissionError. That's like error code 32 or WinError 5 on Windows. The system does this on purpose to protect the file while it's in use.

Even if you try to delete the file yourself with your mouse, Windows shows a message saying "close the file first." This is normal protection in Windows and other operating systems, as confirmed by Python guides and Microsoft info.



### Removing files in a different location:

## Renaming files using os module:


