---
title: Introduction to IndexError
---
## Definition of IndexError:

The IndexError, as the name suggests, it is the error that is related to the index, and when we say index, we are pointing out
all the data structures that depend on indexes to accessing or editing the data structure elements like the list, tuple, dictionaries,
and even the string.

This error occurs when you are trying to access an element in these data structures that doesn't exist there. If you are trying
to access an element in a sequence such as (lists, tuples, dictionaries, string) using an index outside their valid range.

This error typically occurs when the index exceeds the sequence's length, such as trying to access my_list[5]
on a list with only three elements (indices 0, 1, 2). Negative indices that go beyond the start also trigger it,
like my_list[-4] on a short list. It can also happen during loops where the index calculation overshoots.

**Example-1:**
You have a list of 3 target IP addresses, but you tell your script to attack the 10th one.

```python
target_list = ["192.168.1.3", "192.168.2.45", "192.168.2.60"]

print(f"Attacking the target :{target_list[10]}")
```

This will throw an IndexError because the script is trying to access the 10th element regardless that the length of
the target list is only 3.

```python
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "script.py", line X, in <module>
   print(f"Attacking the target :{target_list[10]}")
IndexError: list index out of range
```

**Example-2**
You are using a script to extract a password from a list of stolen credentials. Look at the code below:

```python
stolen_passwords = ["admin123", "password!", "qwerty"]
# We want to see the 5th password in the list
target_password = stolen_passwords[4]
print(target_password)
```

**Output:**

```python
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "script.py", line X, in <module>
    target_password = stolen_passwords[4]
IndexError: list index out of range
```

This script will throw an IndexError exception because the script is trying to access the 5th password in the stolen_passwords
list, but this index is out of range or outside the range of the list because the length of the list is 3, not 5 or more.
By asking for index 4, you are reaching into empty space. The program crashes because it cannot find data that doesn't exist.
